Layered Money
From Gold and Dollars to Bitcoin and Central Bank Digital Currencies
Nik Bhatia

* 01 Fiorino d'Oro (Florin of Gold)
"[...] some forms of money are shared illusions, and others might prove to be real over a long enough time horizon."
"When people come together to agree on a unified accounting denomination, pricing goods and services becomes easier because everybody is on the same page as to what is considered money. When everybody can name their price in the same terms, economic activity flourishes."
"When two things are fungible, they have equal and undifferentiated value between them."
"Throughout the ages, currencies have ceased to exist because of one rudimentary fact: governments are unable to resist the temptation to create free money for themselves."

* 02 The Emergence of Layered Money
"Even though hundreds of coincs were circulating throughout Europe, everybody accounted in florin. [...] It was the world's first world reserve currency."
"Within the double-entry accounting system were the secrets of how bankers could create money not by minting a coin, but from their balance sheet."
"Layers of money came to exist because people trusted forms of money that carried counterparty risk of the issuer."
"[...] bank runs [...] can be more easily thought of as attempts to climb the pyramid of money, as holders of lower-layer money scamble to secure a superior, higher-layer form of money."

* 03 Central Banking
Dutch East India Company == VOC
"[...] the first ever joint-stock company formed in 1602, the VOC."
"As the sahres increaed in value, original investors wanted to realize gains by selling them for cash to new investors, and that is how the first stock market was born."
"The Bank of Amsterdam was able to successfully monopolize the issuance of second-layer money by eliminating public access to first-layer money."
"the Bank of Amsterdam was the first central bank"
"It had absolute financial surveillance over the economy"
"With a monopolization of the second layer, the BoA eventually eliminated the ability to withdraw precious metal altogether yet managed to maintain the public's trust in its second-layer money."
"England's gold standard reverberated throughout the world and eventually pulled every major country's currency into the same sphere."
[AMS: This is an example of harder money driving softer money out of the system, as suggested in The Bitcoin Standard.]
"Third-layer money isn't necessarily subject to more abuse than second-layer money, but it is in fact further away from the safety of s counterparty-free asset like gold coins."
"The BoE's initial charter, issues in 1694, only guaranteed it a life of eleven years. When each charter expired, negotiations were held between the BoE and the government. In the negotiations, the government's primary concern was always to finance its sepnding, and the BoE's motivation was to increase its share price due to the fact that it had private shareholders motivated by profit. The BoE's shares ususally appreciated sizably after charter renewals, as each one granted an extension of monetary power."
"As the pyramid grows, lower layers in the pyramid have the most elasticity but also the most fragility as a by-product."
Bank Restriction Act of 1797: "The act suspended gold convertibility for all BoE notes, a suspension which lasted for over two decades. Financial panics like this one were guaranteed in a money pyramid constructed with elasticity and in a fractionally reserved manner."

* 04 Federal Reserve System
* 05 Retiring Gold
* 06 Dollar in Disrepair
* 07 A Renaissance of Money
* 08 Layered Bitcoin
* 09 Central Bank Digital Currencies
* 10 Freedom of Currency Denomination